feat: GraphQL Code Generator preset-client SWC plugin post (#1110)
the-guild-org/website: website/pages/blog/optimize-bundle-size-with-swc-and-graphql-codegen.mdx

---

> title: Optimize your Bundle Size with SWC and GraphQL Codegen

Reviewer: does it also give performance benefits?  if so, I think we should make sure to highlight it in the blog post and also in the title

Author: In the end websites can load faster, because the bundle size is smaller. I'm not sure if I would call it more performant, as I would associate it with faster working code. 

Maybe we can highlight faster page loading times, like this: _Optimize your Bundle Size with SWC and GraphQL Codegen for Faster Page Loading_.

In my head I would already associate faster page loading times if I see the original title, so I'm not sure if we need to highlight it more

Reviewer: I meant in terms of dev performance, like build times and stuff like that?

Author: I think dev performance is even a little bit less (but should be unnoticeable) because of an extra compilation step if you would compare it to not using a SWC or Babel plugin. But it is definitely more performant if you were previously using Babel. So I think we could leave it as is :)

authors: jessevelden
tags: [client-preset, codegen]

> date: 2023-02-24

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-03-06
```

```tsx
// Instead of operations in a separate .graphql file and importing generated hooks:
import { useGetCartByIdQuery } from './graphql/generated-hooks'
const { data } = useGetCartByIdQuery({ variables: { id: '1' } })

// You can write your operations directly next to your component and get the correct types:
import { graphql } from './graphql'
const GetCartByIdDocument = graphql(/** GraphQL */ `
  query GetCartById($id: ID!) {
    id
    items {
      id
      ...CartItem
    }
  }
`)
// Awesome! We have the correct types for this operation even when we specify it next to our component!
```

However, this approach can come at a cost - the bundle size of your pages can increase
significantly, especially as the number of queries and mutation grows. In this post, we will show
you what the problem is and how to optimize your bundle size with the new
[`@graphql-codegen/client-preset-swc-plugin`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@graphql-codegen/client-preset-swc-plugin)
plugin for your applications supported by the SWC compiler such as projects using
[Next.js](https://nextjs.org) or [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/).

## The Generated Code When Using the `client-preset`

> When using the `client-preset` without any additional optimization, your site's bundle can quickly

Reviewer: @saihaj @n1ru4l @YassinEldeeb We have an open issue about that to solve it for others as well right?

Should we link to it here? otherwise it's very negative for people not using Next/Vite?

Reviewer: oh I see, for people using Babel there is a solution.
I thin it's important to highlight it here so people won't think they don't have a solution.
also, what is the use case for people not using Babel and SWC?

Author: > oh I see, for people using Babel there is a solution. I thin it's important to highlight it here so people won't think they don't have a solution. also, what is the use case for people not using Babel and SWC?

I guess people who don't want an extra build step, but that seems to be rare now a days. If you're using GraphQL Codegen you're already introducing an extra build step, so adding one more to optimize it should be not that inconvenient.

The generated code output for the `graphql` function is a function that looks similar to the
following code, where code-splitting and tree-shaking is not easily possible.

```ts
const documents = {
  'fragment CartItems on CartItem {\n name\n quantity \n  }\n  ': types.CartItemsFragmentDoc,
  'query GetCartById($id: ID!) {\n cart(id: $id) {\n id \n items { \n id \n ...CartItem\n }\n totalItems\n}\n  }\n':
    types.GetCartByIdDocument
}
export function graphql(
  source: 'fragment CartItems on CartItem {\n name\n quantity\n }\n '
): (typeof documents)['\n fragment CartItem on CartItem {\n name\n quantity\n }\n ']
export function graphql(
  source: 'query GetCartById($id: ID!) {\n cart(id: $id) {\nid\nitems {\nid\n...CartItem\n}\ntotalItems\n }\n }\n'
): (typeof documents)['\n query GetCartById($id: ID!) {\n cart(id: $id) {\n id\n items {\n id \n ...CartItem \n } \n totalItems \n } \n } n']
export function graphql(source: string): unknown
export function graphql(source: string) {
  // Here we access the documents object, so the bundler cannot make assumption over what is
  //  actually used at runtime
  return (documents as any)[source] ?? {}
}
```

> This means that every time you use the `graphql` function, you are importing basically all used
> operations in your project, even if those are not being used. This can be a problem if you have a
> lot of documents (query, mutation, and fragments) in your project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every time you use the `graphql` function, all the operations in the project are imported, regardless of wether they are used or not. This can be a problem if you have a lot of documents (query, mutation, and fragments) in your project.
```

<Callout>

>   For more information/ a history of this functionality, you can read more about it in the former

Reviewer: should we link to @n1ru4l 's blog post here instead?

Author: Do you mean this one? https://the-guild.dev/blog/unleash-the-power-of-fragments-with-graphql-codegen

Reviewer: yes

Author: I've now added it as well!

---
title: Optimize your Bundle Size with SWC and GraphQL Codegen
authors: jessevelden
tags: [client-preset, codegen]

> date: 2023-03-09

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-03-16
```

> date: 2023-03-16

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-04-18
```
